Q.1 A 45 years of old female, Mrs. Mary Adam, comes to Dr. Shaz's office for Hyptertension follow up. She has been Dr. Shaz for last 10 years. You (Dr. Peter) are covering Dr. Shaz as he is out of the town for medical conference. She insisted to see Dr. Shaz. How would you counsel her?
Mrs. Mary, I am Dr. Peter. I am covering him for this week. He already discussed all your medical information with me. Therefore, I would try my best to help you. Once we are done, I will convey all information to him. Is that OK?
Patient is always more comfortable with his regular physician as patient-physician rapport is already established. However, in practice, many times you will cover your colleagues. So try to explain situation, why you are covering and express your commitment. Mostly patient will understand and you can finish patient encounter.
Challenge: Seeing new doctor.
Beginning of Patient Encounter.
10626694-doctor.png
Q.2 A 56 year old female, Ms. Elaine McCormick, comes into the office with palpitations. She starts with, “Doc, my heart has been beating very fast for a month. Initially I ignore it but lately it got worse and I could not sleep last night. It looks like some bomb is ticking in there. ” Patient started weeping. How would you counsel her?
(Offer tissue) Mrs. McCormick, I can understand as it could be very troublesome for you. However, do not worry; I am here to help you. Let me ask you few questions and then I will examine you. Is that ok?
Palpitations could be very troublesome and frightening. Therefore, you should always re-assure your patient. Here, wait for few seconds, offer her tissue/water and then you can continue.
Challenge: Worried patient about her symptom.
Beginning of Patient Encounter.
anxiety-worried-womanjpg.jpg
Q.3 You, Dr.Kim, are about to start clinical encounter of a 33 year old male, Mike O’Hall who comes to clinic with complaining of cough for 3 weeks. You just enter the room and he started coughing severely. What would you do next?
Mr. O’Hall, I am Dr. Kim. Let me give you a glass of water and tissue. I know it has been difficult for you.
It is very important that how you handle such a situation when patient actually experiencing presenting symptoms. As a doctor, you are there to help patient. So, here a glass of water or/and tissue paper might help him. Once he stops coughing, you can start clinical encounter.
Challenge: Patient experiencing presenting symptom.
Beginning of Patient Encounter.
ask_patient.jpg
Q.4 You, Dr. Park, are about to start patient encounter for, a 32 year old male, James Daugherty, who comes to ER with complaining of severe headache. You just stepped in his room and you found him in severe headache with both of his hands on his forehead. Suddenly, he requested you to turn off light as it irritates him. What would you do?
Mr. Daugherty, Sure, let me turn it off. Is there anything else I can do to make your more comfortable?
Photophobia might be a symptom if patient has Sub-Arachnoid Hemorrhage or Acute Meningitis. You should always make patient as comfortable as possible by offering your help. If patient is in severe pain, then patient should get pain medicines, but not in the beginning of encounter.  You need to know which pain medicines are right for him based on his presentation.
Challenge:  Patient request you to do something
Beginning of Patient Encounter.
doc-pa.jpg
Q.5 A 39 year old female, Maria Brown, comes to ED with complaining of severe belly pain since morning. You are assigned as his doctor. You stepped in and just started your introduction. She abruptly interrupted you and said, “Doc, you don’t see that I am in severe pain. Please give me something to relieve it.” What would you do next?
Ms. Brown, I can only imagine how severe it is. I want to help you as soon as possible. However, I need to know which pain medicine is right for you. So let me ask you few questions and do physical examination quickly.Is that OK with you?
Many times, patient complains of pain and asks you pain medicine before even you know why he has pain. In such situations, you should express your sympathy to your patients and counsel them that you are there to help them, just give me some times to ask you few questions and do quick physical examination.
Challenge: Asking pain medicine in the beginning
Beginning of Patient Encounter.
13364723-two-pharmacists-with-big-pill.jpg
Q.6 A 19 year old girl, Genji Duchu, comes to your clinic with her mother, Mee Duchu with complaining of vaginal discharge. You stepped in, gave your introduction, and informed about your role. However, Ms. Genji Duchu seemed uncomfortable and hesitant to answer your questions in the presence of her mother. How would you handle such a difficult situation?
Ms. Duchu, would you like to answer my questions in confidential manner. Let me request your mother, Ms. Duchu to step out for few minutes. Is that OK with you?
All medical information is confidential. As a physician, it is your duty to maintain its confidentiality. When patient is with any relative or friend, you should ask patient that, “Is that OK with you to discuss in presence of your relative or friend?” or “Do you prefer to have our discussion alone?” If patient wants confidentiality, then you should request friend or relative to step out. Sometimes patient will not express his desire clearly, so you should be paying attention to subtle signs of it.
Challenge: Confidential medical information
Beginning of Patient Encounter.
confidential.jpg
Q.7 You got a call from Ms. Jenny Hopkins, mother of a 2 year old boy, Joe Hopkins that she is concerned that he started having nose bleed and it does not stop even after pressure. She told you, "Doc, he is continuously loosing blood for last two hours. Please do something otherwise he will die."
Ms. Hopkins. I can only imagine how difficult it is to see him suffering. I am with you. Please continue to apply pressure on his nose and bring him to the hospital as soon as possible. Would you like me to send ambulance to your home?
As a physician, you should remember that any symptoms to child are alarming to parents. You should counsel her and offer all possible help.
Challenge: Worried mother for child
Beginning of Patient Encounter.
worried.jpg
Q.8 An 18 year old male, Uba Carson, with significant past history of Sickle Cell Disease with multiple hospitalizations for pain crisis comes to ED with complaining of pain since morning. You are about to start clinical encounter and he asked you, "Doc, I am in severe pain all over my body. So please give me pain medicines right away." You emphasized importance of history and physical examination before giving you right pain medicine. He replied you, "Doc, why don’t you check my records in computer, even I can tell you to give me Dilaudid. I have been taking it since my childhood. "
Mr. Carson. I would like to tell you that I am with you and I can only imagine how much suffering it is when you are in such a bad pain. I will check your medical records and find out which medicine you have been getting. Please allow me to ask you few more questions. I promise it would be very quick.
Any patient with pain will ask you pain medicines, especially patient of Sickle Cell Disease.  In Sickle Cell Disease, patient comes to ED very frequently with severe pain and gets same pain medicine every time. Still you can’t give him medicine without asking any questions and quick physical examination.  You should counsel him to co-operate with you.
Challenge: Patient is asking for pain medicine
Beginning of Patient Encounter.
medicine.jpg
Q.9 A 24 year old female, Ms. Lauren Onken, comes to clinic with complaining of left wrist pain for 2 days. You reviewed door information, knocked the door, and entered the room. You introduced your-self and shake hands and suddenly she screamed, “Doctor, you are killing me. It’s hurting a lot. ” How would you handle such situation?
Ms. Onken, I am very sorry. It is my fault. I will not repeat it. I will give you pain medicines as soon as I am done. Is that OK with you?
Hand-shake is very important to establish good patient-physician rapport. However, if patient comes to you with complaining of wrist pain, elbow pain, shoulder pain, or hand pain, it is advisable to avoid hand-shake. You can say something, "Mr. XYZ, as you come here with wrist pain, I would not do hand-shake as it might cause you more pain."
Challenge: Will you shake hands?
Beginning of Patient Encounter.
getty_rf_photo_of_wrist_pain_caused_by_crohns.jpg
Q.10 A 73 year old male, Mr. Anthony Gluckman, comes to ER with complaining of sudden onset of shortness of breath since morning. He also complained of worsening of cough with yellowish sputum. You noticed that his breathing is labored and speaking in incomplete sentences. You are trying to get more information and suddenly he asked you, "Doc, I am very short of breath. Do something, otherwise I will die."
Mr. Gluckman, I can see that you have difficulty in breathing. My goal is to make you comfortable as soon as possible. Once I know more about your condition, I will start treatment immediately. Meanwhile, let me ask you few more questions. I promise it won’t take much time. Is that fine with you?
You should quickly respond when patient is feeling any symptoms. Here, you should offer quick help by ordering necessary medicines and oxygen. However, you should explain him that you need more information about his condition.
Challenge: COPD: Doc, do something, I am so short of breath.
Beginning of Patient Encounter.
short_of_breath.jpg
Q.11 A 78 year old male, Mr. Jules Bode, with PMH of HTN, DM type 2, newly diagnosed Atrial Fibrillation on Coumadin comes to ER with complaining of epistaxis since morning. You knocked the door and entered the room. He mentioned you "doc, I know it is because of Coumadin. I will not take it anymore."
Mr. Bode, I agree that Coumadin can be cause of your epistaxis as it makes your blood very thin. However, it could be something else as well. Therefore, we should first find out what is causing it. So do you mind if I ask you few questions and do quick physical examination?
Here, patient is aware of side-effects of Coumadin that is good thing but as a physician you should counsel that epistaxis can be caused by many other reasons. Before giving any treatment recommendations, first you need to find out accurate diagnosis. Here history and physical examination should be done before making any treatment decisions.
Challenge: Doc, it is because of Coumadin.
Beginning of Patient Encounter.
coumadinLogo-3.jpg
Q.12 A 46 years old female, Ms. Amanda Karty, with PMH of newly diagnosed HTN comes to clinic for follow-up. She was prescribed HCTZ 25 mg daily last time. Today, she complaints of frequent urination that interferes her daily activities. She asked you, "Doc, I would like to change my blood pressure medicine ?"
Mrs. Karty, I am concerned that HCTZ (water pill) cause you to have frequent urination. I will change your medicine. I will also closely follow you to make sure that you tolerate new medicine. (Extra: I can imagine how difficult it would be to have frequent urination.)
Any side effect is alarming or frightening for patients especially if it interferes daily activities. So always express your sympathy. Frequent urination is a common side effect with HCTZ. Therefore, it is advisable to prescribe different medication.
Challenge: Side-effect of medicine.
Middle of patient encounter
images-1.jpg
Q.13 Mr. Smith, a 49 years old male with HTN, DM type 2 comes to ER with complaining of chest pain for 2 hours, which increase with deep inspiration. You suspect that it is more likely from pleuritis. Anxious patient asked you, "Doc, my father died of heart attack at the age of 45. Am I having heart attack?"
Mr. Smith, I can understand your anxiety. Based on your symptoms and positive history in your family, heart attack is one of the possibilities. However, there are other diseases can present similar ways. So, let me finish my physical examination and run some blood tests, EKGs- electronic recordings of your heart. I assure you that you will get best treatment possible.
Chest pain is always alarming symptom for patient especially if first-degree relative is died of heart attack. Chest pain has very broad differential diagnosis.Here, positive family history puts him at high risk but you need to finish physical examination, EKGs, CXR and labs. So never give any specific diagnosis. Always be non-judgmental, as it could be anything else.
Challenge: Fear of symptom and relates with relative’ death
Middle of patient encounter
NU119018.jpg
Q.14 A 34 year old female, Ms. Ana Jackson, comes to office for pre-employment check up. She complained of gaining weight of about 10 lbs in last 2 month. She attributed it to smoking cessation as she quit 2 months ago. She asked you, "Doc, I am thinking to start smoking again, as I gained about 10 lbs in 2 months."
Ms. Jackson, I am also concerned about your weight gain. However, smoking is not the right answer. There are many other healthy ways to lose weight such as regular physical exercise, balanced and calorie controlled diet. In addition, smoking will also damage your heart, lung and brain. So, If you want I can refer you to weight management clinic and dietitian.
Weight gain is a very important problem after smoking cessation. Therefore, patient might re-start smoking. So, as a doctor you always offer different healthy options to lose weight such as regular physical exercise, calorie controlled diet. You can also refer him to weight management clinic.
Challenge: Smoking cessation and weight gain
Middle of patient encounter
weight.jpg
Q.15 A 35 year old male, Mr. Mark Zhan comes to office with complaining of palpitations for two months. He started his new job as an accountant for about the same time. You found that he started drinking about 4-6 cups of coffee every day. In the middle of encounter, he asked you, "Doc, I think it is because of my coffee. What do you think?"
Mr. Zhan, it could be it or might be something else. So let me ask you few more questions, do brief physical examination and some lab tests. Once we have all these, I will be able to tell you for sure that what is exactly causing it. However, do not worry; I am here to help you.
Many times patients relate their symptoms to co-incidentally any new changes in their life. However, as a physician always consider all possibilities. Never give any diagnosis without complete clinical encounter including lab tests. Here it could be due to high caffeine intake, but very serious etiology should be ruled out first before making any final diagnosis.
Challenge: Symptom and co-incidentally change in life
Middle of patient encounter
palpitations_lg.jpg
Q.16 A 25 year old female, Janelle Dennis, comes to clinic with complaining of Sore Throat for 3 days. She works in day care center. In the middle of encounter, she asked, “Doc, I am little worried. Should I get off from my work as I have Sore Throat?” How would you answer her?
Ms. Dennis. I can understand your concern. I need more information to find out what kind of infection you have. If you have Bacterial infection, you should take off for first 24 hours. Later on, you can resume work if you feel good. So let me find out for you.
As a physician, you should guide your patients when and how much rest they should have during their illness. Here, if patient has Streptococcal infection, then she should be off in the first 24 hours while taking antibiotics to reduce transmission. After that she can resume her work. You should not give antibiotics without confirmation or letter for unnecessary extended leave.
Challenge: Sore Throat, Should I be off from work?
Middle of patient encounter
sore2.jpg
Q.17 A 34 year old male, Mr. Dennis Martin, comes to clinic with complaining of penile discharge for last two weeks. You found that he has three female sexual partners in the last 3 months. You informed him that it could be HIV or any other STDs. He asked you, "Doc, Should I tell my wife?"
Mr. Martin, you should tell your wife about your condition. She also should be checked for any infection. It will help both of you to get early diagnosis and treatment. In addition, I would be with you during every step of treatment.
As a physician, you should encourage your patient to inform his sexual partners about any STDs. It is shown that it will lead to early diagnosis and treatment. You should not call his partner.
Challenge: Informing about STDs to partner
Middle of patient encounter
STD.jpg
Q.18 A 40 year old female, Ms. Kayla Brown, comes to office with complaining of bruise on her wrist and dark spot under her right eye. She was giving you irrelevant history. Then you told her, “Ms. Kayla, please do not worry. I assure you that all the information would be confidential and you would be safe. I think that you are a victim of domestic abuse.” She started crying and told you, “Doc, you are right. I have been tolerating this for a year. However I don’t earn any money. So, I have to stay with him. ” How would you counsel her?
Ms. Kayla, I am very sorry to hear this. Your safety is my first priority. You don’t deserve this. You should be treated with respect. It does not matter even you earn money or not. I would call my domestic violence counselor. If you wish, you can live in shelter.
Domestic Violence is a very serious but preventable public health problem affecting more than 25 million American women. Domestic Violence victim will not give you clear history. There would be hidden signs in the history. If you have any suspicion, please ask direct questions to your patient. Once it is confirmed, you should re-assure your patient and counsel her all available resources.
Challenge: Domestic abuse: Can’t support myself
Middle of patient encounter
domestic.jpg
Q.19 An 85 year old male, Mr. Milford Brown, comes to clinic in wheel-chair with his son, Mr. Joe Brown, with complaining of fatigue for 3 months. Mr. Joe Brown insisted you to take history in the presence of him. During, history taking, you found that Mr. Brown is not giving you clear answers. You suspected possibility of elder abuse. Then you requested him to step out for few minutes. Suddenly, Mr. Milford Brown told you, “Doc, I am not feeling well. My relations with him are not that great. He gets my pension every month as I can’t walk to Bank. I don’t know what would happen to me. ” He started crying. How would you handle this situation?
(offer tissue and glass of water) Mr. Brown, I am sorry to hear your situation. Please don’t worry. You safety is my first priority. Help is always available for you. I will call social worker and will go over various options available for you.
Elder abuse is very common and serious public health problem. It could be physical, emotional, financial, sexual or neglect. As a physician, you should suspect elder abuse if history does not sound consistent. You can report elder abuse by dialing 800-677-1116. The National Center on Elder Abuse is the organization in USA to make sure elderly people live with dignity, integrity, independence and without abuse.
Challenge: Elder abuse: Will I get my pension?
Middle of patient encounter
elder_abuse2.jpg
Q.20 A 23 year old male, Mr. Andrew Clinton, comes to clinic with complaining of sore throat for 3 days. He also recently visited Miami, Fl with his girlfriend. His girl friend had a similar complaint last week. He is a caption of college soccer team and requested you, "Doc, my big game is coming next week. Can I play?"
Mr. Clinton, I understand that your game is important for you. I want to point out that your condition could be due to viral infection, know as Infectious Mononucleosis. In this condition, your spleen, an organ in your belly, would be enlarged and you would be at higher risk of damage to it. So let me order test and make sure that you do not have that infection.
Here, soccer game is very important for patient. However as a physician, you should make him aware that there is a possibility that your infection could be an Infectious Mononucleosis and he is at risk of splenic rupture if he participates in any contact sports. Patient counseling is very important aspect of physician job. Physician spends about 25% of his time in patient counseling.
Challenge: Should I play game when I have sore-throat/Infectious Mononucleosis?
Middle of patient encounter
sore.jpg
Q.21 A 32 year old male, Mr. Mike Horn, comes to clinic with complaining of cough for 3 months. He mentioned that he is a reporter and went to China for 3 months last year. He also has low grade fever, shortness of breath and weight loss of about 10 lbs in 3 months. Suddenly, he started coughing and you saw bright red blood on the tissue that he has in his hand. He is trying to hide that tissue. What would you do at this time?
(offer glass of water) Mr. Horn, Could you please show me that tissue. I would need to know what it has on.
If patient uses tissue in the middle of encounter while coughing, you need to see that tissue. You will get to know that what color of sputum is and if any blood on it. Patient might be deliberately hiding it. It will show you give special attention to details.
Challenge: Chronic cough: tissue with blood
Middle of patient encounter
cough3.jpg
Q.22  A 67 year old female, Ms. Mary Albee, comes to ED with complaining of coughing up blood since morning. She mentioned that she lost about 200 ml of blood so far and still coughing up blood. She also complained of difficulty in breathing and chest pain. She asked you, "Doc, I have lost so much of blood. Do I need blood transfusion?"
Ms. Albee, I can understand it is very frightening to see blood coughing up. I will check your blood count and blood group and if you need it I will give you right away. Please do not worry, you are in safe hands.
Hemoptysis, Hemetemesis or any similar symptoms would be frightening for patient. You should counsel her that you will do everything possible to help her. Here, you should not rush to give blood transfusion (BT). You should first check CBC and if it is low, you can give her BT.
Challenge: Blood Transfusion: Will I need it?
Middle of patient encounter
Blood_Transfusion.jpg
Q.23 A 67 year old female, Ms. Mary Albee, comes to ED with complaining of coughing up blood since morning. She also has cough for a month and lost about 15 lbs in 4 months. You found that she has been heavy smoker for last 30 years. She asked you, "Doc, I am very afraid, do you think it is due to lung cancer?"
Ms. Albee, I can understand your worry. Because of smoking, you are at high risk for lung cancer. However, it is just one possibility, it could be something else. So let me confirm your diagnosis with tests such as blood tests and chest x ray. I assure you that I would be with you throughout your treatment.
Many times patients assume her diagnosis or do self-diagnosis. It could be right or wrong. As a physician, you should give your opinion that should include all possibilities and offer your help through-out treatment. Here, likely hood of having lung cancer is very high, but it has to be confirmed with tissue biopsy. What-ever diagnosis is, physician support to patient is very important.
Challenge: Hemoptysis in smoker: Is it Lung Cancer?
Middle of patient encounter
hemoptysis.jpg
Q.24 A 62 year old male, Mr. Bill Filo, comes to clinic with complaining of bloody urine for 2 days. He denied any burning urination, lower abdominal pain, fever or any other symptoms. He has Hypertension, Diabetes Mellitus type 2, Atrial Fibrillation and Cerebrovascular accident 2 years ago. His medicines are HCTZ, Metformin, Coumadin and Metoprolol. You mentioned that he needs to get work up which includes blood tests, urine tests and procedure, called Cystoscopy. He asked you, "Doc, I think it is because of Coumadin. Should I stop it?"
Mr. Filo, as you said, Coumadin can cause any bleeding including bloody urine. However, it could be due to many other diseases. Therefore, we need to find out why you have bloody urine. So I will check blood tests, urine tests and if I think, Coumadin has to be stopped, and then I will stop it.
Many times patients attribute their symptoms to side effects of medicines. They think further work up is not necessary and stopping medicine is the answer for their symptoms. As a physician, you should explain all possibilities and importance of taking medicines if patient has to take it. Here, Coumadin can cause bleeding but it could be due to many other conditions as well. So here, patient should get work up for bloody urine.
Challenge: Side effects of medicine: continue or discontinue?
Middle of patient encounter
angry-guy.jpg
Q.25 A 35 year old male, Mr. David Canterbury, comes to ED with complaining of severe knee pain for a day. It starts all of a sudden when he was moving to his new apartment. The pain is about 7/10 in severity, sharp in nature, more with movements and partially relieved with pain medicines. He works as a construction worker. He asked you, "Doc, will I be able to work?"
Mr. Canterbury, I can understand your concern. First, I need to know what exactly causing your pain. So let me ask you more questions and do physical examination. I assure you that I will do everything possible to help you. So, let me ask you few more questions. Is that OK with you?
Patient’s ability to work can be compromised with certain medical condition. Therefore, it is very important for patient. Here you do not know why patient has this pain. It could be just sprain, muscle strain or due to rupture of ligament. Each condition has different prognosis. So never give patient false reassurance. You should give all possibilities and re-assure patient that you are there to help him.
Challenge: Will I be able to Work?
Middle of patient encounter
advice.jpg
Q.26 A 50 year old male, Mr. Herman Anthony, comes into the office with complaining of blood while coughing for 2 days. He also has low grade fever, fatigue and low energy for 2-3 weeks. He denied any chest pain, SOB, N/V, and urinary and bowel complaints. He has HTN and DM type 2. He was recently started on ASA for primary prevention of CAD. His other medications are HCTZ and Metformin. He asked you, “Doc, I just started ASA, I think it is due to ASA.” How would you answer him?
Mr. Anthony, I understand your concern. It is good that you are aware of side-effects of ASA. It is one possibility but there could be something else. So let me ask you few more questions. If it is due to ASA, then you can stop taking it. Is that OK with you?
Here, patient attributes his hemoptysis to ASA. It could be true but as you are not sure 100%. So it is advisable to do full work up and then decide whether ASA should be stopped or not. Therefore, you should counsel your patient that full work up is needed. You should also offer all possible help during work up.
Challenge: Will it because of Aspirin?
Middle of patient encounter
cough1.jpg
Q.27 A 39 year old, Ms. Maria Brown, comes to ED with complaining of serve belly pain since early morning at 4 AM. She said it is 8/10 in severity, in right lower belly, moves to umbilical region, and increase with movement. You are about to ask any associated symptoms and she interrupted you and ask you, “Doc, don’t ask me questions. I need pain medicines. I can’t bear this pain.” How would you counsel her?
Ms. Brown, I know that you are in severe pain and I want to help you as soon as possible. Therefore, I need to know what exactly causing your pain. So please let me ask you few more questions. It would be very quick. Is that OK with you?
Here, patient is in severe pain and asking for pain medicines even before you know why she has pain. In these situations, express your sympathy towards patient and offer help as soon as possible after your clinical encounter. It is very common situation when patient can’t bear pain and ask for pain medicines. You need to explain him that you will give him pain medicines once you are done with clinical encounter.
Challenge: Abdominal pain: Give me pain medicines
Middle of patient encounter
people-lady-lying-pain-1.jpg
Q.28 A 25 year old African American, Mr. Courtely Afolabi, comes to clinic in the evening with complaining of back pain for 10 years. He mentioned that his regular physician is out of town and he has severe back pain. He mentioned that he takes morphine every 6 hours to relieve his intolerable pain. You found him in hurry and he was answering your questions with very little or no information. You are trying to get more information about his back pain and he said, “Doc, I told you that I have back pain and I take Morphine then why you ask so many questions. I am in hurry, so please give me prescription and I will go. ” What would you do?
Mr. Afolabi, I know that you are in pain but I need to know more about your back pain and if you need I will give you medicines. So please allow me to ask you few more questions. It would be quick. Is that OK with you?
In clinical practice, you will have patient with pain-seeking behavior like this one. They mimic severe pain and force you to write their desired medicine. As a responsible physician, you need to find out exact indication of any medicine. Without it, you can’t write any prescription.
Challenge: Why many questions? Give me Morphine.
Middle of patient encounter
backpain.jpg
Q.29 A 56 year old male, Mr. Robert Singer, comes to clinic with complaining of frequent urination, increase thirst and weight loss for a month. He lost about 5 lbs in a month. He denied any fever, sad mood, chest pain, shortness of breath, or any bowel symptoms. You asked him family history and he replied, ”Doc, My father had diabetes when he was in his 50s. Do I have it now?”
Mr. Singer, I understand your concern. Having history of Diabetes in your family puts you at higher risk of getting it. However, it could be something else as well. So let me finish my physical examination and I will let you know what I think. However, whatever your diagnosis, I will try my best to help you. Is that Ok with you?
Mr. Singer is concerned about possibility of Diabetes based on his symptoms. He is at somewhat high risk of getting it as positive family history. As a physician, until you confirmed your diagnosis, you should give patients all possibilities. In addition, it is very important to reassure patient that you will do your best to help him. It will increase patient’s confidence in you.
Challenge: Will I have Diabetes?
Middle of patient encounter
explain2.jpg
Q.30 A 32 year old female, Ms. Lora Brown, comes to office with complaining of fatigue and depressed mood for 3 weeks. She recently lost her husband and son in car accident and since then she is feeling like this way. You are trying to get more information and suddenly she told you, “Doc, I lost everything. I want to die. ” She started crying. How would you handle this situation?
(Offer tissue and wait for few seconds) Ms. Brown, I understand how bad you can feel now. You are not alone, I am with you. I want to tell you that suicide is not the answer for it. We have many resources that can help you such as medicines and counseling. Many people do get better after some time. So, let me help you by asking few more questions.
Counseling for depressed patient is very important. You might have very depressed and crying patient with poor eye contact and wants to die. Suicide prevention counseling is very critical during your encounter. You should understand his situation, offer all helps which includes counseling, medicines, suicide prevention helpline and support groups. Here, patient needs immediate help and as a physician, you should provide all possible help.
Challenge: I want to die.
Middle of patient encounter
sad4.jpg
Q.31 A 56 year old male, Mr. Jason Berthold, comes to your office with complaining of fatigue and sad mood. He mentioned that he lost his wife in battle of breast cancer about 6 months ago and all of a sudden, he lost his job as his company laid off workers to cut cost. He asked you, “Doc, I feel very bad. I was working in that company for last 30 years. And all of a sudden, I was laid off. How can I feed my family?” He started crying.
(Offer tissue and wait for few seconds) Mr. Berthold, I am very sorry to hear this. This is very tough time in your life and you need help. I will try my best to help you. Therefore, I need to know more about your conditions, so let me ask you few more questions. Is that OK with you?
Here, patient is very sad about his personal situation and he needs help. As a physician, you should provide all possible help. Soothing words will help him to calm down. Here you can also put hands on patient’s shoulder for consolation if appropriate.
Challenge: I cannot feed my family.
Middle of patient encounter
sad2.jpg
Q.32 A 32 year old female, Ms. Jessica Ma, comes to clinic for obesity evaluation. Her BMI is 37 and she gained about 20 lbs in last 4 month. She denied any complaints at all. She wants to reduce her weight as it is very embarrassing to her and she worried about getting various complications. Her mother has Osteoarthritis (OA) at the age of 45. She asked you, “Doc, Will I get Osteoarthritis? Please help me."
Ms. Ma, I appreciate your understanding about your condition. Overweight can cause many problems including arthritis. We have many resources to lose weight such as weight management programs, Dietitian help and much more. So let me ask you few more questions and I will give you all information.
Here, patient realized her problem and came to you to get some help. As a physician, you should appreciate it as her participation in care, will increase compliance and get favorable results. You should offer all information about various resources available to her.
Challenge: Obese Female: Will I get Osteoarthritis?
Middle of patient encounter
history.jpg
Q.33 A 45 year old male, Mr. Jimmy Katz, comes to clinic and asking for morphine. He told that he does not have time and just want to get this prescription. He gets upset once you asked about more questions. How would you counsel him?
"Mr. Katz, I can understand that you are in hurry, but in order to prescribe you pain medication, I need to know more about your medical condition. So please bear with me. It won’t take much time."
Here, patient has drug seeking behavior. Patient will give you any reason to force you to write a prescription for him but as a responsible physician, you need to know why patient need this prescription. You need to explain him that you need to know more about his condition and if he needs you will write it.
Challenge: Drug seeking behavior.
Middle of patient encounter
doctor5.jpg
Q.34 A 36 year old male, Mr. Peter Zuckerberg, comes to clinic with complaining of shortness of breath for a month. He smokes about 1 PPD for 15 years and tried many times to quit but failed. How would your counsel him?
Mr. Zuckerberg, I appreciate that you tried many times. I also know that it is very difficult to quit. However, I strongly recommend you to try one more time and if you want, I can refer you to our smoking cessation program.
Many patients need multiple attempts before they quit smoking successfully. This is true for any addiction. You should appreciate patient’s effort and always offer help to facilitate quitting.
Challenge: Smoking cessation counseling
Middle of patient encounter
smoking.jpg
Q.35 An 18 year old female, Ms. Taylor Lively, Comes to clinic with complaining of being obese for last six months. She has been trying different dietetic plans, including self-induced vomiting, laxatives and diuretics. According to your records, she lost about 10 lbs in last 3 months. Her BMI is 18 kg/m2. You explained her importance of having normal weight and she asked you, "Doc, I am too fat in my friend circle. I have to lose weight to be smart and attractive. So please give me some pills so I can quickly lose weight. "
Ms. Lively, I understand why you want to lose weight. As a concerned physician, I would strongly recommend you to maintain average body weight. You weight is below average and it is not advisable to lose even more weight. I would suggest you to get help from Dietitian. Is that OK with you?
Here, patient wants to lose even more weight although she is malnourished. Anorexia Nervosa and Bulimia Nervosa are very common among teenagers. As a physician, you should explain importance of maintaining average body weight and various available resources.
Challenge: I need to lose weight as I am very big.
Middle of patient encounter
weight2.jpg
Q.36 A 48 year old male, Mr. James Rosenbaum, comes to clinic with complaining of being very obese for last 3-4 years. In Last year, he has started regular exercise in gym to lose weight and he lost about 10 lbs in last 6 months. His current BMI is 32. He asked you, "Doc, I am tired of doing all these. It's not helping me. Please give me pills to lose weight."
Mr. Rosenbaum, I appreciate your hard work to lose weight. Sometimes it is very difficult to lose weight and you should have extra help. I would recommend you to enroll for weight management program and get help from Dietitian. You should avoid pills for weight reduction. Is that OK with you?
Here, Patient has tried exercise and lost about 10 lbs in 6 months. Patient might need to watch his diet, as he might be taking extra calorie. Therefore, you should advised patient to continue non-pharmacologic measures such as regular exercise, weight management program and referral to Dietitian. Pills for weight reduction should be avoided.
Challenge: Prescribe me medicines to lose weight.
Middle of patient encounter
weight.jpg
Q.37 A 35 year old female, Ms. Gloria Rand, comes to clinic with complaining of sleeping difficulty for 4 months. She started recently job as a TV channel reporter and she works in different shifts including night shifts as well. She drinks about 2-3 cups of coffee in the evening, sometimes does exercise around 6 PM, watches television, and does reading till 11 PM as she could not sleep. She asked you, "Doc, I need serious help. I can't take it anymore. Give me some sleeping pills."
Ms. Rand, I know it must be very tough to you. Many times, difficulty in sleeping related to life styles. You may get benefit by limiting coffee in the evening, doing exercise not later than early afternoon. You should also use your bed only for sleep. I would suggest you to try these things first.  It is not advisable to use sleeping pill in your condition. Is that OK with you?
Here patient’s insomnia is related to her poor life-styles. First, life styles changes should be tried. Medicines for sleeping are not advisable as they can cause addiction and dependence. You should advise patient why they get insomnia and what they should do to correct it.
Challenge: Give me sleeping pill to get sleep.
Middle of patient encounter
Sleepingpills.jpg
Q.38 A 72 year old male, Mr. Pier Engelbert, comes to ER with complaining of sudden deafness in left ear since morning. He reported tinnitus, fullness in the ear and dizziness since morning. He denied any injury or exposure to loud noise or any other complaints. You finished history and about to start physical examination, He asked you, "Doc, will I hear again?"
Mr. Engelbert, I can understand your concern. To answer your questions, I need to know why exactly you have deafness. So let me finish my quick physical examination and some tests. I promise you that I will try my best to help you. Is that OK?
Any patient would be worried after sudden hearing loss or vision loss. When patient asked, you can’t give much information as you need to examine him and run some tests to get exact diagnosis. You should re-assure him that you will try your best to help him. Never give any definitive diagnosis without doing physical examination and necessary tests.
Challenge: Deafness: Will I hear again.
Middle of patient encounter
deafsymbol.jpg
Q.39 A 22 year old female, Ms. Alpna Weber, comes to clinic with complaining of sad mood since her mother died due to breast cancer 2 weeks ago. Now she lives alone but she experienced flash back of her mother’s memory. You are about to ask her next question and she started crying. What would you do next?
(offer tissue and wait for few seconds) Ms. Weber, I am sorry to hear that you are experiencing these symptoms. I can’t imagine how difficult it would be for you. I would like to help you as much as I can. In addition, I want to tell you that medicines and other resources such as support groups, counselor will help you as well. Is that OK to ask you few more questions?
Patient can feel very depressive symptoms in situation like this. She is at high risk for suicide. As a physician, you should make sure that patient would be in safe place and offer all possible helps that include counseling, medications, support groups and referral to psychiatry.
Challenge: My mother died 2 weeks ago, started crying?
Middle of patient encounter
sad3.jpg
Q.40 A 34 year old female, Ms. Lauren Esterbrook, comes to clinic with complaining of sad mood since she got fired from her job about a week ago. She asked you, "Doc, I was a single working mom, how would I feed my children?"
Ms. Esterbrook, I am very sorry to hear this. It must be very stressful situation for you. I can refer you to our social worker. She can help you find various resources for you.
Here patient is a single working mother and lost source of income for her family. This is one of the precipitating events for depression. As a physician, you should provide various resources including immediate help by referring her to social worker. In addition, it is advisable to give her counseling, medications and referral to psychiatry if necessary.
Challenge: How can I feed my children?
Middle of patient encounter
sad2.jpg
Q.41 A 26 year old female, Ms. Karen Hammer, comes to clinic with complaining of bruise on his back for a week. She initially started to tell you some story but she later on admit that she has been physically and sexually abused by her boyfriend. She asked you, "Doc, I am very afraid of him. I do not want to live with him anymore. However, I don’t have any place to go. What should I do?"
Ms. Hammer, I can understand your situation. I want to tell you that you don’t deserve to be treated like this and your safety is my first priority. So let me call Domestic Abuse Counselor and she will inform you various resources.
Domestic Abuse is a very serious public health problem. As a physician, patient’s safety is your first priority and you should provide all possible resources to patient that includes counseling including reassurance,  information about National Domestic Violence Hotline (1-800-799-SAFE(7233)) or TTY 1-800-787-3224, Domestic Abuse Counselor and information about emergency plan in case she needs it.
Challenge: Domestic abuse: Where will I go?
Middle of patient encounter
domestic2.jpg
Q.42 A 36 year old male, Mr. David Siegel, comes to clinic with complaining of wrist pain for a week. He got injured while he was moving boxes at home. It is dull, 5/10, worsens with movements and partially relieved by pain medicines. In the middle of encounter he asked you, "Doc, I am very worried. Will I be able to play piano again?"
Mr. Siegel, I can understand your concern. Let me finish my physical examination first and I will give you my impression. Most patients with similar presentation do get better with rest and medicines. So, let me examine you.
Here, based on presentation it looks like patient might have ligament strain, but until you finish physical examination and run some tests you can’t tell exactly what is causing this pain. Therefore, you should explain patient what you will do to confirm it and also offer your full assistance to help him.
Challenge: Will I be able to play piano?
Middle of patient encounter
getty_rf_photo_of_wrist_pain_caused_by_crohns.jpg
Q.43 A 58 year old male, Mr. Matthew Sheller, comes to ER with complaining of ankle pain for 2 days that starts suddenly. It is 8/10, throbbing in nature, aggravates with movements, relieved partially by Naproxen with no fever or other symptoms. His father and uncle had gout. He was concerned about his condition and asked you, "Doc, Will it be gout?"
Mr. Sheller, I can understand your worry. Positive family history puts you at higher risk of developing gout. Your symptoms could be due to it or something else. Therefore, to confirm it, I need to do quick physical examination and run some tests. Is that OK with you?
Here, positive family history puts him at higher risk of getting Gout. Based on personal experience, patient might perceive that his symptoms are due to same disease that his family member had. You should explain him all possibilities and things need to be done to confirm it. In addition, you should offer your full assistance to help him.
Challenge: Ankle pain: Will I have gout?
Middle of patient encounter
1301617887Z3m4Z9.jpg
Q.44 A 42 year old male, Mr. Anthony Remuzzi, comes to clinic for routine physical examination. He denied any symptoms. He has been smoking 1 PPD for last 15 years and never tried to quit smoking. He also drinks beer occasionally and denied any illegal drugs. You counseled him health hazards of smoking and encouraged him to quit smoking. During conversation, you mentioned possibility of getting lung cancer. He asked quickly, "Doc, could you please get CT scan of lung to check whether I have any tumor in the Lung?"
Mr. Remuzzi, I would like to tell you that as a long-standing smoker you are at high risk for Lung Cancer, but till now there is not any single proven test to screen for Lung Cancer including CT scan of Lung. However, I strongly suggest you to quit smoking. Is that fine with you?
Many cancers can be detected early by effective screening tests.    Examples:1) Breast Cancer- Yearly Mammogram after 40 years of age. 2) Colon Cancer- 10-yearly Colonoscopy or Yearly Fecal Occult Blood Testing (FOBT) and 5-yearly Sigmoidoscopy after 50 years of age. 3) Cervical Cancer-Yearly Pap smear. However, there is not any single proven cost-effective screening test for Lung Cancer including among active smokers. It leads to unnecessary further follow-up including invasive tests. This should be explained to patient and smoking cessation should be strongly recommended.
Challenge: Routine medical examination: Can you get CT scan of lung to check any tumor in my lung??
Middle of patient encounter
test2.jpg
Q.45 A 24 year old male, Mr. Joseph Ammann, comes to clinic with routine physical check-up in the winter. He denied any complaints. He smokes 5 cigarettes every day but denied any alcohol and illegal drugs. You recommended him to quit smoking and get annual flu vaccine. He resisted you, "Doc, I don't want to take flu vaccine as I heard that some people get fever after that."
Mr. Ammann, you are right, some people do get fever after getting flu vaccine. Therefore, if you are afraid of it, then you should not take it. However avoid contact with any person who has flu.
Many patients avoid taking flu vaccine as they are afraid of getting any side-effects of flu vaccine such as soreness, redness, or swelling where the shot was given or it can cause low-grade fever or aches. They will subside in a day or two. Patients should be counseled about it and flu vaccine should be recommended strongly.
Challenge: Vaccine: will I get any reaction?
Middle of patient encounter
doctor5.jpg
Q.46 A 45 year old female, Ms. Michelle Koay, comes to clinic for routine follow up. She denied any symptoms. Her mother had breast cancer at the age of 56 years. She wants to check herself for breast cancer as she was concerned about it. She recently started her new job at local Supermarket and she is not too sure about her insurance coverage. So, she asked you, "Doc, will it cover by my insurance?"
Ms. Koay, I appreciate that you want to get mammogram. Generally most of the insurances cover screening mammogram. I will check with your insurance company. So let me order it.
Screening mammogram is mostly covered by all insurance companies as it is proven screening test to detect breast cancer early. Many times, if patient changes her job, then, she may not know as it is not that simple to find out. As a physician, you should offer assistance in dealing with insurance company. You can also refer her to financial counselor if it is available in your clinic/hospital. Never post-pone any test as many times patient will not come back and you will lose that opportunity.
Challenge: Will my insurance cover Mammogram?
Middle of patient encounter
doctor2.jpg
Q.47 A 28 year old female, Mrs. Erika Nabel, comes to clinic for annual physical examination. She denied any symptoms but express her desire to become pregnant. She smokes about 1 PPD for last 3 years and drinks alcohol occasionally. She recently read about bad effects of smoking on baby and wants to quit smoking. She asked you, "Doc, how long does it take to stop smoking?"
Ms. Nabel, I appreciate your decision to quit smoking. By doing so, you can avoid all long term complications of smoking as well as any bad effects on baby. Duration for smoking cessation varies, but once you stop smoking for a while, you can become pregnant.
Smoking has many deleterious health effects not only on pregnant female but also on baby. Therefore, decision to quit smoking should be always appreciated. Duration varies which depends on patient's determination to quit smoking, dependence on nicotine and many other factors. During this period patient might need nicotine gum or patch that can affect baby as well. So until, patient quit smoking completely, pregnancy should be avoided.
Challenge: Doc, I want to become pregnant. How long does it take to stop smoking?
Middle of patient encounter
history.jpg
Q.48 A 22 year old male, Mr. Angel Hernandez, comes to clinic with complaining of bad breath for a month. He denied any other symptoms. On further questioning, you found that he has been using chewing tobacco. After physical examination, you explained him plan including recommendation to quit chewing tobacco. He replied you, "Doc, I don’t smoke. I just use smokeless tobacco."
Mr. Hernandez, even if smokeless tobacco is injurious to your health. In addition, your current problem may be because of chewing tobacco. So I strongly recommend you to quit it. We have many resources available to help you. Would you like to try?
Many people have myth that smokeless tobacco is a safe alternative to cigarettes, although it is as dangerous as smoking. Tobacco-chewer become chemically dependent on them as nicotine can achieve higher blood concentration then smoker. It can also cause oral cancer, heart disease, teeth and gum disorders and many more. So, it should be explained to patient and strongly suggested to quit smoking.
Challenge: I am not smoking any more. I just use smokeless tobacco.
Middle of patient encounter
bad-breath-treatment-halitosis.jpg
Q.49 A 22 year old male, Mr. Angel Hernandez, comes to clinic with complaining of non-productive cough for a month. He denied any other symptoms. On further questioning, you found that he smokes 5-8 light cigarettes every day for last 3 years. After physical examination, you explained him plan including recommendation to quit smoking. He replied you, "Doc, I just smoke light cigarettes. It is not that bad."
Mr. Hernandez, Every cigarette can cause same problems. There is no difference between light cigarettes and regular cigarettes as light cigarettes have tiny holes just where your fingers hold them. So I would suggest you to quit smoking.
Cigarettes are cigarettes. There is no difference. Each can cause all kind of similar problems. So, patient should be informed as many people have myth that these kinds of cigarettes are good. Also you should offer full assistance to quit smoking.
Challenge: I smoke only light cigarettes.
Middle of patient encounter
smoking3.jpg
Q.50 You are seeing pediatrics patients and got a call from Mr. Thomas Ringler, father of a 2 year old boy, Jonny Ringler, comes with his father to clinic with complaining of fever and runny nose for a day. He also had non-productive cough for 2 days. He denied any other symptoms and also denied any recent travel. He goes to day-care center every day. His father asked you, "Doc, did he get it from Day-Care Center?"
Mr. Ringler, It could be possible. As many times child gets it from other children. You should not send him to day care center until he gets better.
Children often get infection via close contact either in day-care center or in school. Parents should be educated about it and be advised not to send their children to any where until they get better.
Challenge: Did he get it from Day-Care Center?
Middle of patient encounter
cough2.jpg
Q.51 A 72 year old male, Mr. John Saag, comes to clinic with follow up after recently diagnosed with prostate cancer. His PET scan showed metastasis in multiple lumber vertebras. He got worried and asked you, "Doc, Will I die soon?"
Mr. Saag, I can understand as it is very difficult situation. I am with you and will try my best to give you all possible treatments.  We also have various support groups and counselor for cancer patients. Would you like to join it?
Talk with cancer patient is always challenging as patient is very anxious and sometimes depressed as well. You should re-assure him that you will do everything possible to help him. Cancer treatment needs multi-disciplinary approach, so, radiation oncologist, surgical oncologist, medical oncologist, oncology social worker; support groups, palliative care team and family should be involved as soon as possible if appropriate.
Challenge: Will I die soon?
Middle of patient encounter
sad3.jpg
Q.52 A 57 year old male, Mr. Thomas Wright, came to clinic for chronic cough. You asked his permission to start physical examination. You just started examine respiratory system. Suddenly, he asked, "Doc, What are you doing?"
Mr. Wright, I am listening to lung sounds.
Always explain to patient which part you are examining and what you are looking for. Do not use any medical terminology such as "auscultation", "tenderness", "rebound tenderness", "percussion", "palpation".
Challenge: Curious patient about physical examination.
During physical examination
curious.jpg
Q.53 A 27 year old male, Mr. Roger Hill, comes to clinic late evening without any appointment. He claimed that his regular physician is out of town and he has run out of Morphine for his chronic back pain. He seems in hurry but answered your questions. You explained him about need of physical examination. He refused physical examination and asked you, "Doc, Why you want to waste your time? I have been taking Morphine for 10 years for this terrible back pain. Just give me prescriptions." How would you counsel him?
Mr. Hill, I realize that you are in severe pain. I want to help you as soon as possible. However, I need to know why exactly you have this pain. So please allow me to examine you and then I will give you pain medicines if you need it.
You will encounter many patients with pain seeking behavior. There are many signs that give you hint about it, such as changing doctor frequently, exaggerated response to pain with normal physical examination and negative imaging studies, late evening hours show up and without appointment, in hurry and refuse to cooperate in history taking and physical examination. As a physician, your role is to counsel him importance of history taking and physical examination. You should also offer your full assistance to relieve his pain.
Challenge: Why you need to examine me? Give me Morphine.
During physical examination
back-pain-921.jpg
Q.54 A 28 year old female, Ms. Jessica Bojana, called you about her 2 year old son. She complained that he started having fever of 100.6 F since early morning. She is calling you from work as she can't get day off. She is your regular patient. She asked you, "Doc, I need your favor. As I am at my work and can't bring my son to your office, Please write me prescriptions." How would you answer her?
Ms. Bojana, I know how difficult is to see him suffering. I will try my best to help your son and his health is my first priority. However before I write any medicines, I need to know why he has fever. So please bring him to the hospital, I will examine him and run some tests. If you have any difficulty bringing him, I will call my social worker to assist you. Is that OK with you?
Many times parents of young children ask you to write prescriptions without seeing them. As they are working parents, may not come to hospital. So as a physician, you explain importance of doing physical examination and blood tests and you should also offer assistance in transportation. Social worker will help you in that matter by sending ambulance to child's place.
Challenge: Write prescriptions for my son, as I am at work.
During physical examination
worried.jpg
Q.55 A 24 year old female, Ms. Lauren Onken, comes to clinic with complaining of left wrist pain for 2 days. You introduced your-self without hand-shake and finish history taking. Now you informed her that you need to do physical examination. You started it by touching her left wrist; she suddenly yelled at you, "Doctor, it's hurting me."
Ms. Onken, I am very sorry. I will not touch your hand again. I was just trying to examine it so I get more information about your condition. So let me examine your other hand. Is that OK with you?
Pain is very common presenting symptom and you should be very careful when you examine these patients. Initially you can say something like this, "Mr. XYZ, I know you are in pain, so I would be very quick and gentle while examining you. Is that OK with you?"
Challenge: Doc, you are hurting me!!!!
During physical examination
history.jpg
Q.56 A 52 year old male, Mr. Wu Zong, comes to clinic with complaining of back pain for a week. It is in the lower back, 4/10, dull, aggravates after sitting long hours at his office and relieved by pain medicines. He denied any fever, motor and sensory symptoms and urinary and bowel complaints. You just finished physical examination and he asked you, "Doc, should I take bed-rest? I think it will help me to recover quickly."
Mr. Zong, Let me explain. Based on your history and my physical examination, I think you might have ligament tear or muscle spasm. However, let me get x ray and other blood tests to confirm it. Generally, this kind of pain gets better soon with early ambulation rather than bed rest. Therefore, I would suggest you not to take bed rest.
Back pain is very common presenting symptom for clinic visit. More than 95% it is due to musculoskeletal conditions. In which, early ambulation will shorten recovery time.
Challenge: Back pain: Will I be bed-ridden or do walking?
During physical examination
lower-back-pain1.jpg
Q.57 A 62 year old male, Mr. Stephen Stone, comes to clinic with complaining of difficulty in passing urine for two months. His urinary frequency increases to every 2 hours with 2-3 times in the night. He also has to strain himself but denied any burning while urination, fever, belly pain or back pain. You finished physical examination and explained importance of getting prostate examination. He asked you, "Doc, I heard that prostate problem can give such symptoms. Will I have prostate problem?"
Mr. Stone, I can understand your anxiety. Based on your symptoms, it could be prostate problem or something else. To confirm it I need to examine prostate and run some blood tests. Please rest assured, whatever your diagnosis is, I will try my best to help you.
Many-times patients attribute their symptoms to specific diagnosis. It might be wrong. As a physician, you should mention all possibilities and offer your full assistance to help them.
Challenge: Will it be prostate problem?
During physical examination
advice.jpg
Q.58 A 24 year old female, Ms. Tiffany Cort, comes to clinic with complaining of heel pain for a month. It is dull, 4/10 in nature, aggravates by prolonged standing, relieved by rest and Motrin, not radiating and it is getting worse over the last week. She started her job as an office secretary in Bank and started wearing sandals with pencil heels. You are about to finish physical examination and she asked you, "Doc, do you think it's because of my pencil heels?"
Ms. Cort, it seems like heel pain began after you started wearing sandals with pencil heels. Therefore, it could be due to it or could be something else. So let me confirm it by doing x ray and other blood tests.
Here, heel pain is looks like due to heel pain but until you confirm your diagnosis, you should consider all possibilities. You should also not give any early recommendations. Once you confirm diagnosis, you can give recommendations and various treatment options.
Challenge: Heel pain: Is it because of my pencil heels?
During physical examination
heelpain.jpg
Q.59 A 22 year old female, Ms. Nancy Marsh, comes to clinic with complaining of cough for a month. It is more in the morning when she goes for jogging. It is dry but not associated with fever, chest pain, palpitations or any heart burn. She started jogging for about the same time. You finished your history and about to start physical examination. You told her, "I need to examine your chest." She began to untie her gown but finding it difficult. How would you help her?
Ms. Marsh, let me help you untie gown. Is that OK?
As a physician, you should offer help during physical examination. Before you help her you should ask her permission. You can also provide help during sitting up position, lying down position, or during gait examination, etc.
Challenge: Untie gown?
During physical examination
cough-treatment.jpg
Q.60 A 21 year old female, Ms. Ally Peters, comes to clinic with complaining of heartburn for a month. It is intermittent, burning in nature, located in lower chest, more in the night time. She recently started her college and lives in dorm. You informed her to need of physical examination and offered your help to untie gown. She was very co-operative with physical examination. You are doing palpation of lower chest and she asked you, "Doc, do you want me to remove my bra to examine me?"
Ms. Peters, you do not need to remove it as I can examine your chest very well.
In exam, you are not allowed to examine; corneal reflex, breast, pelvic and rectal examination. You can tell her to lift breast if you need to hear heart sounds but never tell her to remove it. You should also not examine through gown or bra.
Challenge: Do you want me to remove bra?
During physical examination
heartburn01.jpg
Q.61 A 72 year old female, Ms. Sally Rosenberg, comes to clinic with complaining of dizziness. It started about a month, more in the morning when she gets up from the bed. She also fell down yesterday but denied any head injury. You finish history and doing physical examination. You requested her to walk to check her gait. She asked you nervously, "Doc, I am very afraid. I can't do this. I might fall down."
Ms. Rosenberg, I can understand your anxiety. Please do not worry; your safety is my first priority. Therefore, I will walk with you to support you if you need so. So could you try it?
Elderly patient with dizziness are more prone for fall. Fall is a significant cause of morbidity for aged population. You need to provide support during walking.
Challenge: Gait: I can't do this. I might fall down!!!!!
During physical examination
01-old-patient-nurse.jpg
Q.62 A 26 year old female, Ms. Christine Copeland, comes to clinic with complaining of belly pain for two weeks. It is burning, 3/10 in severity, non-radiating, aggravates with food, and relieved by OTC antacids. It is also associated with occasional nausea but no vomiting, urinary and bowel complaints. You finished history and explained her need for physical examination. You finish inspection of the belly and start auscultation of her belly. Suddenly she screamed, "Doc, it is too cold. You are killing me."
Ms. Copeland, I am so sorry. It is my fault.  Let me rub stethoscope very well. (After few seconds), now it is warm enough. Is that OK with you?
During physical examination, you should pay attention to comfort of your patients. Cold hands or cold stethoscope would be very uncomfortable for her. If it happens, you should admit your mistake and correct it quickly. You should remember that in your exam, Standardized Patients (SPs) get physical examination 12 times in a day.
Challenge: Doc, It is too cold, you are killing me.
During physical examination
stomacheache.jpg
Q.63 A 27 year old female, Ms. Jessica Epstein, comes to ER with complaining of severe abdominal pain. It started this morning when she was sleeping. It is 8/10, sharp in nature, around umbilical region, aggravates with movements, and radiates to back. You finished history and washed your hands for examination. Once you start palpation, she shouted at you, "Doc, stop it right now. It is hurting me."
Ms. Epstein, I am very sorry. I will not repeat it again. I need to do it to get more information about your condition. I promise you, once I am done I will give you pain medicines. Let me do it on other side. Is that OK with you?
Clinical encounter with patient with pain is always challenging. You need to be very gentle and quick. In addition, you need to re-assure patient that once you are done with it, pain medicines will be given.  You can also tell patient like this before doing physical examination, "Ms. Epstein, I know you are in severe pain. Therefore, I would be very quick and gentle. So let me start to get more information about your condition. Is that OK with you? "
Challenge: Doc, it's hurting me. Stop it now!!!
During physical examination
people-lady-lying-pain-1.jpg
Q.64 An 82 year old female, Ms. Elizabeth Hammer, comes to ER with complaining of pain in right hip after having fall in the morning. She described that it is 8/10, sharp, more with movements of leg and none-radiating.  Since then, she can't walk and she came in stretcher. You finished history and informed her about physical examination. Politely, she asked you politely, "Doc, could you please get X-ray? It is too painful."
Ms. Hammer, I know you are in severe pain. Therefore, I would be very quick and gentle. Once I am done I will give you pain medicines right away.  I agree with you that x-ray will give you information about fracture but it does not me all information. So let me examine you, is that OK with you?
Physical examination of patient with pain is always challenging. In the beginning, you should re-assure that you would be very quick and gentle and offer pain medicines once you know what is causing your pain. Here patient wants to avoid physical examination and tell doctor to get X-ray. As a physician, you should explain importance of getting physical examination in addition to X-ray.
Challenge: Doc, please get X-ray. It is too painful to do any examination.
During physical examination
hip.jpg
Q.65 A 35 year old regular jogger, Mr. Michael Karlsson, comes to ER with complaining of right knee pain while he was playing soccer with his son this morning. It is 6/10 in severity, dull, aggravates with movements and walking. He experienced difficulty and pain during physical examination even though you provided full assistance. He seemed to be worried and just after physical examination he asked you, "Doc, I love to jog, Will I be able to do?"
Mr. Karlsson, I know that regular exercise is very important for you. At this point, I need to know why exactly you have pain, so let me get x ray and other lab tests. Once I have all information, I would be in better position to answer your question. However, I would try my best to help you.
Patient's life-style is very important to him. Here, patient is concerned about his ability to do jogging in the future. In such situation, patient should be explained work up plan and offered all possible help to recover him as quickly and fully as possible.
Challenge: Will I be able to do exercise?
During physical examination
knee-pain.jpg
Q.66 A 48 year old male, Mr. George Copeland, comes to clinic with belly pain for a month that radiates to back. He also noticed weight loss of 20 lbs in last 6 months. His father died of pancreatic cancer at the age of 56 years and mother died of stomach cancer at the age of 64 years. He denied any other symptoms. You are about to start physical examination but he interrupted you and asked you, "Doc, what you think? Do I have some cancer?"
Mr. Copeland, Based on your presentation, it is one of the possibilities as you are at high risk because of positive family history of cancer. Once I am done with physical examination, blood tests and CT scan, a special x-ray of your belly, I would be able to tell you what exactly causing it. However, I re-assure you that I will try my best to help you.
Patient gets nervous if he experience same symptoms as his loved one had when they were diagnosed with any serious disease. Here patient's counseling is very important to relieve anxiety. Full work up should be explained to patient.
Challenge: Do I have some cancer?
During physical examination
dpctor22.jpg
Q.67 You have just finished clinic follow up of overweight, Mr. Fung, for Diabetes Mellitus type 2. You advised him to lose weight. Mr. Fung has been trying to lose weight for last 10 months but could not succeed. He asked you, "Doc, I tried many things to lose weight. I am really tired of it. Please suggest me some solution."
Mr. Fung, I appreciate that you want to lose weight. It will also help you to control your blood sugar. I would suggest meeting Dietitian to plan your diet. We also have weight management program. I strongly recommend you to join it.
Weight loss is many times challenging task for patient. So always offer help and let them know how it will help them to manage their medical conditions. You can offer them regular physical exercise, calorie controlled diet, weight management program and various support groups.
Challenge: Could not lose weight.
During closure
weight.jpg
Q.68 A 34 year old male bank executive, Mr. Bob Dyler, comes to clinic with Back Pain. He did not have any alarming symptoms, so you strongly suspect that it is due to muscle strain. You explained him work up plan thoroughly. However, at the end he asked, "Doc, I don't want you to miss anything. Please order MRI of back as it is covered under my insurance."
Mr. Dyler, I appreciate that you are very much involved in your care. I would definitely consider MRI if it is necessary. Let's wait for lab results and x-ray report. Is that OK?
It is good to have patient who is very much involved in his care. Many-times, patient reads about various tests and treatment options on the internet. Therefore, even if patient suggests any test, you should evaluate necessity of this test in patient's management. You can politely explain him why you think that it is not indicated at this point.
Challenge: Wants unnecessary tests.
During closure
test2.jpg
Q.69 A 22 year old female, Ms. Angelina Uzelac, comes to clinic with complaints of sinusitis. You are discussing workup plan with her and she asked you, "Doc, I heard that XYZ herbal medicine is very good for sinusitis and it does not have any side-effect. Should I try?"
Ms. Uzelac, for many diseases, herbal medicines are suggested but many times their safety and efficacy is not clear-cut. Let me get its name and I will get back to you with more information.
Many times patient reads about herbal medicines on the internet or based on his cultural beliefs he thinks that it will work for him. As a physician, you should respect patient's belief but on the other side, if you are not sure do not give any false information. You can always get back to him with more information.
Challenge: Herbal Medicine.
During closure
herbal-medicine.jpg
Q.70 A 38 year old male Construction Worker, Mr. Castino Baca, comes to clinic with complaining of Back pain for a week. It is about 6/10 in severity, more when lying down, no radiation and relieved by pain medicines. There was mild para-spinal tenderness, negative Straight Leg Raising Test (SLR) and normal motor and sensory functions of lower extremity. You think that patient should get pain medicines and do early ambulation for treatment. He asked you, "Doc, My job is very stressful. Therefore, I need to get some rest to recover quickly. Please give me 10 days off. "
Mr. Baca, I know you are in pain, so I will try my best to help you. Based on history and physical examination, I think that you have muscle spasm or may be something else. I will run some tests such as x ray of spine. Meantime, I can write a letter to your employer to assign you light work. Is that OK with you?
Back Pain is very important reason for sick absenteeism. You should not write a letter for unnecessary extended sick leave l as it is ethically and economically wrong thing to do. You should explain what you think about his medical condition and what is important for early and full recovery. You can write a letter to assign light duty while he recovers from this back pain.
Challenge: Can you give me letter for 10 days of rest?
During closure
Mid-Back-Pain.jpg
Q.71 A 24 year old female, Ms. Jessica Smith, comes to clinic with past medical history of Schizoaffective disorder complaints of 20 lbs of weight gain over 3 months. She denied any other symptoms except her appetite increased over time. You did not find any positive physical examination findings. You explained her work up and give follow up after 2 weeks to get result. She asked you, "Doc, I need to be admitted as it would expedite my work up and I will get better soon." How would you counsel her?
Ms. Smith, I can understand importance of getting reasonably quick work up. I will try my best to get you early appointment for your tests. It won't take much time. Therefore, I think you should not be admitted. Is that OK with you?
Here, She needs work up for weight gain that is not urgent. She can easily get all work up as an out-patient. Hospitalization is only required for more urgent medical conditions. If patient insists, you should explain why you think that way and any assistance to expedite her work up.
Challenge: I want to be admitted.
During closure
anxiety-worried-womanjpg.jpg
Q.72 A 45 year old female, Ms. Rodriguez Medina, comes to ED with complaining of lower belly pain for 2 days. It is sharp, 8/10 in severity, aggravates by movements, no relieving factors, radiates to back, and associated with vomiting. On P/E, rebound tenderness is present and no bowel sounds. You explained her work up including possibility of surgery. Suddenly, she told you, "Doc, I can't afford it as I don't have health insurance. Give me some medicines and I will go home."
Ms. Medina, I am very concerned about your condition. Right now, your health is my first priority. You deserve best possible care and you need to be admitted. For health insurance I will call social worker later on. Is that OK with you?
Here, patients' health is first priority. Social worker can help her find various ways to pay this hospitalization but it should not delay her treatment. Many uninsured patients delay or refuse life-saving treatment.
Challenge: Give me medicines, I can't get surgery.
During closure
13364723-two-pharmacists-with-big-pill.jpg
Q.73 A 67 year old male, Mr. Mark Clark, comes with occasional red blood in stool for 2 weeks. He said it is painless, without any nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. He sometimes has constipation. He smokes 2 PPD for 30 years, and drinks alcohol occasionally. His mother died due to colon cancer at the age of 75 and father died due to heart attack at the age of 68 years. You explained him work up plan and get it done as soon as possible. He informed you that, "Doc, Tomorrow, I am going for Florida to celebrate my 25th marriage anniversary. I will do my work up after 3 weeks of my vacation. Is that OK with you?"
Mr. Clark. I am concerned about red blood in stool. I know you have big plans for Florida trip but I want to tell you that this could be symptoms for any serious disease and early diagnosis and treatment will help you. These tests won't take much of your time. Is that OK with you?
Here, patient does not understand seriousness of condition and necessity of early work up. For him, Florida trip is very important and he is very excited about it. As a concerned physician, you should emphasized importance of early work up.
Challenge: I will come back after my Florida trip.
During closure
1255352890QVmjp4.jpg
Q.74 A 22 year old female, Ms. Terry Morgan, comes to clinic with complaining of sore throat for 3 days. It is associated with low grade fever, runny nose and body weakness. You finished physical examination and explained her work up and treatment options. She insisted you, "Doc, I need antibiotics otherwise it will get worse. I have mid-term exam from tomorrow."
Ms. Morgan, I know that you need to appear for exam but let me finish my tests. It won't take much time. If you have bacterial infection, I will definitely give you antibiotics.
Here, patient is worried about her tests and wants to get well soon. If she has viral infection, antibiotics will not help her. Therefore, as a physician, you should explain importance of getting accurate diagnosis and then offer her all possible help.
Challenge: Will I need antibiotics?
During closure
Antibiotics_250x250.jpg
Q.75 A 32 year old male, Mr. Mike Horn, comes to clinic with complaining of cough for 3 months. He mentioned that he is a reporter and went to China for 3 months last year. He also having low grade fever, shortness of breath and weight loss of about 10 lbs in 3 months. You were discussing various possibilities and he asked, "Doc, do you think it could be TB? I am very afraid that I will not be able to my work. "
Mr. Horn, Based on your presentation, TB is one of the possibilities. I need to run some tests such as sputum tests and chest x ray to confirm it. In addition, TB is a treatable infection. Once you get treatment, you can start working.
Many times patient assumes that based on his presentation, he might have some serious medical conditions. As a physician, you need to give him accurate information that it is just a possibility and what you will do next to confirm it.  You should address any of his concerns such as return to work, return to school or any other social issues.
Challenge: Will I have TB?
During closure
265125-Tuberculosis240x240.jpg
Q.76 A 77 year old Mr. Smith comes to office with complaining of memory loss. You finished seeing him and now you are doing closure by telling him work up plan for memory loss. Which of the following sentence is appropriate?
Mr. Smith, I will order CT scan of head, which is a special x ray of your head to see inside of your brain and some blood tests.
You need to explain any test in simplified language. If you want to use MRI, please explain it immediately in lay man language. This is also true for any medical conditions. Few examples: 1). Appendicitis: Irritation/infection of small part of intestine called appendix.  2) Pyelonephritis/UTI: Infection of kidney and bladder that collects urine.  3). Alzheimer disease: a type of dementia due to brain disease.   4). Angina: Decrease blood supply to your heart.   5). Hypothyroidism: Decrease function of your neck gland called thyroid.
Challenge: Medical Terminology: When and How to explain.
During closure
medical terminology.jpg
Q.77 A 28 year old female, Ms. Patricia Justice, comes to clinic with complaining of being obese. Her BMI is about 34 and she has just started mild exercise but she could not watch her diet. She wants to lose weight as she is thinking to get married soon. She asked you, "Doc, I need to get bariatric surgery. Should I get it? My friend had it and she lost about 50 lbs in 4 months."
Ms. Justice, I appreciate you started exercise. It is a very difficult task to lose weight and I agree that you need extra help.  I would suggest you do regular exercise and you might get benefit from Weight Management program. It is also important to you watch your diet. I can refer you to our Dietitian.  In your case, Bariatric Surgery is not a good choice as it has many complications and you can lose weight with more safe methods. Is that OK with you?
Here, patient wants to lose weight quickly. Patient hasn't tried regular physical exercise, strict calorie-controlled diet or Weight Management Program. Bariatric surgery is an option for morbid obese patients (BMI > 40 or higher) or obese patient with weight related co-morbid conditions (BMI 35 to 39.9) such as DM or Hypertension or be unable to achieve or maintain a healthy weight through diet and exercise.
Challenge: I need bariatric surgery.
During closure
istockphoto_5193311-doctor-patient-relationship.jpg
Q.78 A 75 year old male, Mr. Marc Tripodi, comes to clinic as he had bloody urine this morning. He has blood-tinged urine for a month. He ignores it and thinks that it is due to old age. He denied any fever, burning urination, urgency and frequency. On P/E, no positive findings elicited. You explain him importance of getting work up, he replied, "Doc, I think it is due to my old age. I don't need any work up. "
Mr. Tripodi, old age should not give you bloody urine. It is because of some problems related to your kidney or urinary bladder. Therefore, you should to get work up, so we can diagnose and treat it as soon as possible. So let me order some tests. Is that OK with you?
Old age should not give bloody urine. Here, patient does not want to get any work up. You should explain importance of getting work up to be able to diagnose and treat underlying problem quickly.
Challenge: I am getting older.
During closure
istockphoto_5193311-doctor-patient-relationship.jpg
Q.79 A 42 year old male, Mr. Daniel Herbert, comes to clinic with complaining of constipation for a week. He works as bank officer and eats junk and fatty food every day. He hardly does any kind of physical exercise. His father was diagnosed with colon cancer at 72 years of age. You finished physical examination and explained him further work up plan. He was surprised and asked you, "Doc, I think I should have Colonoscopy. It could be sign of cancer."
Mr. Herbert, I think your problem is more related to your life-styles. You should have more balanced diet including fiber, more fluid intakes and regular physical exercise. I think colonoscopy is not necessary at this point. However, rest assured, if you need it, I will order it. Is that OK with you?
Here, patient's constipation is more related with life-style changes rather than any secondary causes such as cancer. Although patient has positive family history, he should get first colonoscopy at the age of 50 years as first degree relative has colon cancer at > 60 years of age. So many times patient will insist you to order unnecessary tests based on their personal experience or influence of media, but as physician, you should guide them what is appropriate.
Challenge: I should have colonoscopy.
During closure
doctor2.jpg
Q.80 A 42 year old uninsured female, Ms. Lindsey Longo, comes to clinic with complaining of breast pain for a month. It is dull, 3/10 in severity, non-radiating, no aggravating and relieving factors. Her mother was diagnosed with breast cancer at the age of 58. She never had mammogram before. You explained her work up plan including mammogram. She asked you, "Doc, I don't have health insurance. How gonna I pay for it? Please give me just medicines. "
Ms. Longo, I can understand your situation but your health is my first priority. You should get mammogram to find out why you have this pain. I will call social worker to find out various resources for you. Is that OK with you?
Millions of people do not have health insurance in USA and it is extremely difficult for them to afford costly work up and treatments. There are many resources available for them such as Medicaid, Medicare and referral to social worker to give them alternative option.
Challenge: Will mammogram be covered by my insurance?
During closure
172.jpg
Q.81 A 54 year old female, Ms. Sherry Townsend, comes to clinic with complaining of left wrist pain for 2 days. It started when she fell down while cleaning kitchen. You introduce your-self without hand-shake and finished history taking and physical examination. You are about to start your impression and she asked you, "Doc, Do I have wrist fracture?"
Ms. Townsend, Based on your history and physical examination, it is one of the possibilities. However this could be something else as well. So let me get X-ray and it will tell us. Meanwhile I will give you pain medicines to help you. Is that OK?
Here patient's wrist pain is due to fall, which could be due to fracture as well. Therefore, you need to get X-ray before you can come to final diagnosis. Meanwhile you should reassure patient and give her pain medicines to help her.
Challenge: Will I have fracture on my wrist?
During closure
wristpain.jpg
Q.82 A 35 year old male, Mr. Larry Smith, comes to clinic with complaining of knee pain for 2 days while he was playing tennis. It is 6/10 in severity, dull, aggravates with movement and relieved with rest and pain medications. You finished rest of history and physical examination. You also explained him your impression and work up plan. He asked you, "Doc, could you please write me a letter to my employer? I need to take rest to get well soon. "
Mr. Smith, I agree with you as you might need some rest to get well soon. Therefore, I will write a letter about your medical condition to your employer. You might be able to do some light work at your job. Is that OK with you?
Patient with knee pain can do light work depending upon underlying diagnosis. So here you can offer your help including letter to his employer that should mention which kind of duties he can do and after what time he can resume his regular duties. Many times patients insist doctor to write a letter to extend unnecessary rest for medical point of view.
Challenge: Will you write a letter to my employer?
During closure
knee-pain.jpg
Q.83 A 24 year old female, Ms. Stacey Bieber comes to clinic with complaining of whitish vaginal discharge for a week. She is sexually active only with her boy friend. You finished your physical examination including explaining importance of getting vaginal examination. You informed her impression and work up plan. She asked you, "Doc, should my partner also be treated?"
Ms. Bieber, yes, sometimes, this kind of infection also affects sexual partner. Therefore, I would recommend that he should be tested as well and treated if he has infection.
Here it is most likely due to Candida infection, which can be sexually transmitted as well as it can be due to antibiotic use, immune-compromised state such as Diabetes Mellitus, Steroid use etc.  To prevent re-infection, both partner should be tested and treated together.
Challenge: Vaginal discharge: Will my partner need treatment?
During closure
history.jpg
Q.84 A 24 year old female, Ms. Stacey Bieber, comes to clinic with complaining of whitish vaginal discharge for a week. She is only sexually active with her boy friend only. You finished your physical examination including explaining importance of getting vaginal examination. You informed her impression and work up plan. She asked you, "Doc, did I get it from my boy-friend?"
Ms. Bieber, you might get from your partner as well as other reasons such as recent antibiotic use, steroid use or poor immunity can cause this kind of infection.
Fungal infection-Vaginal candidiasis is a very common vaginal infection that can be transmitted via sexual contact or other causes such as recent antibiotic use, steroid use or poor immunity. You should explain emphasize importance of treatment for sexual partner.
Challenge: Vaginal discharge: did I get it from my partner?
During closure
172.jpg
Q.85 A 23 year old male, Mr. Patrick Gotti, comes to clinic with complaining of vomiting and diarrhea for 2 days. It is associated with crampy belly pain, 3/10 in severity with no fever and other symptoms. He had a college party a day before he got sick. You finished physical examination and explained him work up plan. He was concerned about his classes and he asked you, "Doc, can I go to my college?"
Mr. Gotti, I think it is due to food poisoning but it could be something else. Therefore, I would recommend you to stay home till you get better. I can write a letter for you. Is that OK with you?
Here patient might have food poisoning or Gastroenteritis. For any confirmed or suspected infectious disease it is advisable to avoid contact with other people to limit spread of infection. Here, you should explain possibility of infectious disease and reason to avoid classes.
Challenge: Gastroenteritis.
During closure
images11.jpg
Q.86 A 58 year old male, Mr. Matthew Sheller, comes to ER with complaining of ankle pain for 2 days, which starts suddenly. It is 8/10, throbbing in nature, aggravates with movements, relieved partially by Naproxen with no fever or other symptoms. His father and uncle had gout. He was concerned about his treatment and asked you, "Doc, Will I need join injection?"
Mr. Sheller, It would be early to give you any treatment plan.  Treatment options depend on accurate diagnosis. So let me confirm it with quick physical examination and some tests. I want to tell you that I will try my best to help you. Is that OK with you?
Many times patients insist to get particular treatment that may not be appropriate. Some patients believe that intravenous or intramuscular medicines are stronger than oral medicines and help them to recover quickly. As a physician, you should explain importance of getting definitive diagnosis and suitable treatment.
Challenge: Will I need joint injection?
During closure
SuperStock_1566-448644.jpg
Q.87 A 68 year old female, Ms. Marry Sheller, comes to office with complaining of bilateral knee pain for a week. She mentioned that she has osteoarthritis and has mild pain for a year but since last week, she has severe pain on both knees. She also complained that, “Doc, I can't even walk, please give me something that work right away. Can you give me steroid injection in my knees?
Ms. Sheller, Well, first I need to confirm it what is causing you this pain. Once I will know I can decide best possible treatment for you. We have many treatment options available such as oral medicines, intravenous medicines and joint injection. Please rest assured, I will try my best to help you.
Many times, patient suggest you specific drug or mode of delivery based on their personal experience or influence of media. It might not be true for all cases. Therefore, you need to counsel your patient about all available treatments based on his diagnosis.
Challenge: It's terrible pain. Give me steroid injection!!!!
During closure
knee-pain-4.jpg
Q.88 A 52 year old male, Mr. Wu Zong, comes to clinic with complaining of back pain for a week. It is in the lower back, 4/10, dull, aggravates after sitting long hours at his office and relieved by pain medicines. He denied any fever, motor and sensory symptoms and urinary and bowel complaints. You finished physical examination and explained him work up plan. He was insisting you to get MRI. He asked you, "Doc, I heard that MRI will give us all information. Please get my MRI of back. I don't want to take any chance."
Mr. Zong, I agree that MRI can give us more information than x ray or any other imaging study. However, I think at this point, we should wait for all other tests. If you need it, I will definitely order it. Is that fine with you?
Many times patients insist you to order unnecessary and expensive tests that may not change management at all. You should counsel patient about why you are not considering particular test and willingness to order if he needs it.
Challenge: Will I need MRI of Back?
During closure
lower-back-pain1.jpg
Q.89 A 62 year old male, Mr. Stephen Stone, comes to clinic with complaining of difficulty in passing urine for two months. His urinary frequency increases to every 2 hours with 2-3 times in the night. He also has to strain himself but denied any burning while urination, fever, belly pain or back pain. You finished physical examination and explained importance of getting prostate examination. You also explained him assessment including possibility of having enlarged prostate. Suddenly he gets little nervous and asked you, "Doc, Will I need prostate surgery?"
Mr. Stone, Enlarged prostate is just one of the possibilities. Let me first confirm it with prostate examination and other blood tests. Afterwards I will discuss all treatment options. Is that OK with you?
Here, patient gets nervous about thinking of prostate surgery even before confirming diagnosis. It is very common in practice of medicine. In this situation, you should advise patient to wait till you confirm diagnosis and discuss all possible treatment options.
Challenge: Will I need prostate surgery?
During closure
01-old-patient-nurse.jpg
Q.90 A 67 year old male, Mr. Eric Ebeling, comes to ER with complaining of sudden onset of weakness of right arm and leg since morning. He could not walk as well as do any routine activities. He also noticed slurred speech but denied any sensory deficits. You asked him history and did physical examination.  You can't check his gait as he can't walk. You explained him work up plan and treatment options. He nervously asked you, "Doc, Do you think I would be able to walk again?"
Mr. Ebeling, I can understand your concern. Before work up, I can't give you exact information, but I would like to tell you that many patients with stroke do get better over time with medications and physical therapy. Let's hope for the best. Meanwhile I will do everything for you. Is that OK with you?
Here, patient is worried about his Activities of Daily Livings (ADLs) such as ambulation. Stroke is one of the most important causes of disability among elderly people. Here, you can't tell how much and how quickly he will respond to medicines and rehabilitation therapy but you can reassure that you will do everything possible to help him and hope for the best.
Challenge: Will I be able to walk again?
During closure
WEAKNESS.jpg
Q.91 A 73 year old male, Mr. Anthony Gluckman, comes to ER with complaining of sudden onset of shortness of breath since morning. He also complained of worsening of cough with yellowish sputum. He has history of severe COPD with multiple hospitalizations for COPD exacerbation and intubation in the past. You finished history taking and physical examination. You also explained him work up plan including need to hospitalization. He asked you, "Doc, Will I need breathing tube this time?"
Mr. Gluckman, I am aware of your situation that you often need breathing tube when you have exacerbations like this. This time, I will get chest x ray and blood tests including level of oxygen and carbon dioxide. Meanwhile, I will closely monitor your breathing status. If you get worse, then breathing tube will be placed. Is that OK with you?
Acute COPD exacerbation is very common admitting diagnosis and many times patients end up to be intubated. Even if patient is intubated in the past, doesn't mean that he needs intubation this time. It all depends on severity of exacerbations, Arterial Blood Gas (ABG) test and clinical condition. All these things should be explained to your patient.
Challenge: COPD: Will I need breathing tube?
During closure
Medical_breathing_tube.jpg
Q.92 A 56 year old male, Mr. George Waves, with PMH of Diabetes Mellitus, HTN comes to ER with complaining of pain and swelling of lower third of right leg for 2 days. He denied any injury to leg. You finished history and physical examination. You also explained him need for antibiotics and hospitalization. He quickly refused it, "Doc, just give me some antibiotics. I would be OK. I have to take care of my business."
Mr. Waves, I can understand that you have some important work to finish but your health is my top priority. At this time, you need hospitalization and antibiotic treatment; otherwise your condition can get worse. Therefore, I strongly recommend you to get admitted. Is that fine with you?
Many times, patients think that oral medicines would be enough and hospitalization is not necessary to get better as they have some other obligations. When you counsel them and emphasize that their work is important but their health is top priority for you. In terms of Psych evaluation, if patient is alert, oriented to time, place and person and makes reasonable decision then it is not indicated. Hospital police should be called only if patient is danger to himself or to others.
Challenge: Give me antibiotics and I would be ok. I have to take care of my business.
During closure
Antibiotics_250x250.jpg
Q.93 A 32 year old female, Ms. Eva Siegel, with PMH of Hypothyroidism, Rheumatoid Arthritis, comes to clinic with worsening of knee pain and wrist pain for a week. History taking and physical examination are finished and work up plan is being discussed. You mentioned need to get newer medicines. She was found be little bit worried and asked you, "Doc, please give me generic medicines. I can't afford branded medicines."
Ms. Siegel, I want to help you as quickly as possible. However, I can't do so with old medicines. I have to prescribe you new medicines. So let me call pharmacy to get you all new medicines.
Newly discovered branded medicines cost much higher than old generic medicines. However, these medicines might be more effective as well. If patient needs it, you should explain importance of getting it and various resources available to make them affordable. You can refer them to social workers, or various plans offered by Drug Company itself.
Challenge: Please give me generic medicines. I can't afford branded medicines.
During closure
13364723-two-pharmacists-with-big-pill.jpg
Q.94 An 81 year old female, Mr. Cyrus Heavey, with PMH of DM, HTN, Hypothyroidism, Osteoarthritis, Macular degeneration of Retina comes to clinic with complaining of bilateral gradual hearing loss for a month. He answered all of your questions and co-operate with you during physical examination. You explained her work-up plan including special tests such as audiometry. He asked you, "Doc, I think I am getting old. Why you need all these tests?"
Mr. Heavey, I know that many old patients do get more problems with hearing but we need to find out why you have hearing loss. With recent advance in medicine, we can treat many conditions that can improve your hearing. These tests are also useful to compare with future tests and to select hearing aids if you need to. So let me order these tests. Is it fine with you?
Old patients are more susceptible for hearing loss but first etiology should be confirmed as many diseases are treatable. Patient should be explained this and be offered full assistance in getting these tests.
Challenge: Deafness, Doc, I am getting old!!!
During closure
images-(2).jpg
Q.95 A 68 year old male, Mr. Patrick Copeland, comes to clinic with complaining of bloody urine for last two days. He denied any burning sensation while urination, hesitancy, urgency or lower belly pain. His father died due to metastatic prostate cancer at the age of 72 years. You finished history and physical examination including work up plan. You mentioned possibility of having prostate problem. He immediately gets nervous and asked you, "Doc, Will I have Prostate Cancer?"
Mr. Copeland, I can understand your concern. You are at slightly higher risk of getting it as your father had it. However, it could be because of something else. So to confirm my diagnosis I need to examine your prostate and order some blood tests, urine tests and ultrasound of prostate. Is that OK with you?
Patient gets nervous if he experience same symptoms as his loved one had when he was diagnosed with any serious disease. Here, definitely patient is at high risk for prostate cancer but you need to confirm it with PSA test and biopsy.
Challenge: Do I have Prostate Cancer?
During closure
1255352890QVmjp4.jpg
Q.96 A 58 year old female, Ms. Mary Alba, comes to clinic for first follow up for her newly onset DM type 2. She brought blood sugar readings of which fasting sugar ranges from 110-160 mgs% and post-prandial ranges from 150-210 mgs%. She denied any other complaints. You did physical examination and explained her work up plan. During this, you mentioned to get Hemoglobin A1c. She asked you, "Doc, What is Hemoglobin A1c?"
Ms. Alba, it is a type of blood test which tells us your blood sugar level over last 3 months. I would order it for you.
Patient should be informed and understand all DM management tools such as FSBG monitoring, HbA1c, Insulin and medications administration, detection and treatment of side-effects, foot care, eye care and regular follow up. Here, HbA1c test should be explained in lay man language.
Challenge: What is Hemoglobin A1c?
During closure
01-old-patient-nurse.jpg
Q.97 A 34 year old female, Ms. Maryon Fisher, comes to clinic for follow up of newly diagnosed HIV. The CD4 count was ordered last time and you informed her that it is 440 cells/cubic millimeters. She asked you, "Doc, What is CD4 Count?"
Ms. Fisher, it is a special kind of blood cell count, which tells us disease severity and once we start treatment, effectiveness of therapy can be monitored.
Here, patient should be explained what is CD4 count and importance of it in lay-man language. HIV is a chronic disease and understanding of disease and it therapy is very important for better clinical outcome.
Challenge: What is CD4 count?
During closure
images-(3).jpg
Q.98 A 42 year old male, Mr. Michael Nelson, comes to clinic with complaining of recurrent back pain for last two years. It is 4/10, dull in nature, aggravates by prolonged sitting, partially relieved by pain medicines. It is none radiating with no motor, sensory symptoms. There are no positive findings on physical examination. You explained him work up plan and offer him to give pain medicines. He felt little surprised and asked you, "Doc, I am tired of taking all medicines. I think I need surgery."
Mr. Nelson, I think your pain is because of ligament strain or muscle spasm. So let me confirm it with x-ray. Meanwhile you can take pain medicines. Most patients do get better with pain medicines and physical therapy. Surgery is not an option at this point.
Many times patient feels frustrated as pain persisted even after repeated evaluations and pain medicines. For such patients, it is very important that they understand etiology of condition and various treatment options. Patient might suggest you any treatment that they think useful but you should educate them.
Challenge: Will I need surgery for back pain??
During closure
Mid-Back-Pain.jpg
Q.99 A 56 year old male, Mr. Mike Nelson, comes to ER with blood in stool. He noticed occasional blood for last 7 days but today he surprised with toilet bowl full of fresh blood and rush to emergency room. He also experienced fatigue and lightheadedness. You finished physical examination and explained him work-up plan including need for hospitalization. He got anxious and asked you, "Doc, give me blood transfusion and discharge me from ER. I have very important business conference tomorrow. I have to be there."
Mr. Nelson, I do understand importance of your business conference but right now, your health is my first priority. You might bleed more, so you need to be admitted and work up has to be done to find out why you are bleeding. So please reconsider your decision.
Many times patient request you to discharge him early due to social or professional reason. But as a physician, you should explain severity of condition and necessity of work up and treatment including hospitalization.
Challenge: Please discharge me. I have big conference tomorrow.
During closure
dpctor22.jpg
Q.100 A 56 year old male, Mr. Steve Dunne, comes to clinic with complaining of frequent urination, increased thirst and weight loss of 15 lbs in last 2 months. He also noticed that his appetite increased recently. He denied any other complaints and also denied any alcohol, smoking and recreational drugs. You finished your examination and explained him work up plan. You explained him possibility of Diabetes Mellitus. He seemed little nervous and asked you, "Doc, do I need insulin injection?"
Mr. Dunne, I am thinking DM as a possibility only. I need to confirm it with blood tests. Once, I confirm, I would be able to give you various treatments options. Is that OK with you?
Many times patients get worried once they hear DM. As it is a chronic disease, patients should be informed about disease and it managements which include various treatment options such as life-style changes (regular exercise and calorie controlled diet), oral medicines, insulin injections, importance of eye and foot care.
Challenge: Do I need Insulin??
During closure
insulin.jpg
Q.101 A 49 years old female, Ms. Carolyn Mayer, comes to clinic with complaining of back pain for last two months. She also experienced hot flushes and mood irritability for the same time. She denied any other complaints and denied any smoking, alcohol and recreational drugs problems. You explained her work up plan including possibility of osteoporosis, weak bone due to menopause. She curiously asked you, "Doc, should I start calcium and vitamin D?"
Ms. Mayer, as I mentioned, your condition is due to weak bone, in which case calcium and Vitamin D are indicated. Let me find out it by ordering some blood tests and special x-ray called DEXA scan. I will prescribe if you need it. Is that OK with you?
Many times multivitamins and minerals are overused. Here they might be indicated as patient could have menopause induced osteoporosis. Once you confirm it then, you can give recommendations.
Challenge: Should I start Calcium and Vitamin D?
During closure
calcium_D_1.jpg